Add filter by subject post (#323)
DFE-Digital/bat-design-history: app/posts/manage-teacher-training-applications/2021-02-25-filter-by-subject.md

- French, German and Spanish together is commonly labelled ‘Modern languages’

Renaming subjects can be problematic. For example, ‘Primary’ (code: 00) is often renamed to ‘Primary (5-11)’ or ‘Primary (7-11)’. But there are also instances where ‘Primary’ is renamed to a subject that already exists, such as ‘Primary with mathematics’ (code: 03).

## What we changed and why

This change included:

- introducing a new filter pattern to display a long list of subjects. There may be as many as 40 subjects displayed in the list, so showing them as standard list of checkboxes, similar to other filters, would have extended the filter panel to an unmanageable length.
- providing a means to search through the list of subjects so that a user does not need to scroll through the list of items. For example, they can type ‘primary’ and will be presented with all the primary subjects.
- repeating the selected subject tags in the context of the filter, providing an immediate and obvious confirmation of the subjects that have been applied and an additional way to remove the filters.

## How it works

The subject filter only shows subjects for the courses offered by the provider.

> If there are more than 15 subjects, JavaScript is used to add a search box. Typing in the search box will update the subject list below with subjects that match the search term. If there are no matches, the list will be empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are 16 or more subjects, javascript is used to add a search box. Typing in the search box will update the subject list below with subjects that match the search term. If there are no matches, the list will be empty.
```

Reviewer 2: As above

If JavaScript is unavailable, the subjects are still contained within the scrollable region, but the search box is no longer shown.

> If there are 15 subjects or fewer offered by a provider, the subject filter will be displayed as a list of checkboxes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are less than 16 subjects offered by a provider, the subject filter will be displayed as a list of checkboxes.
```
😄

---
title: Filtering applications by subject
description: Let users filter the applications list by the course’s subject
date: 2021-02-25
---

> Users need to be able to filter their applications by subject.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be good to say a little more about this need, even if it's just that we've seen it in research.

Reviewer 2: Agree, I think we can get some details from @billwessel-dfe

---

> title: Filter applications by subject

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Filtering applications by subject
```

description: Let users filter the applications list by the course’s subject
date: 2021-02-25
---

> We introduced a subject filter to allow users to filter by the course’s subject in the applications list.

Reviewer 2: Kill

Author: Updated as requested.

> ## Why we are doing this

Reviewer 2: Kill heading, but the text within this section can be the intro

Author: Updated as requested.

> Providers need to be able to filter their applications by subject.

Reviewer 2: Instead of saying ‘providers’ say ‘users’.

Author: Updated as requested

> When providers share applications with people who do the shortlisting (for example, subject leads in a school or a subject tutor at an HEI), those users only need to see specific subjects and not the entire list.

Reviewer 2: We don't allow for sharing. The user is either in the system or their not.

Author: Okay, sentence removed.

- Average number of subjects offered: 10
- Maximum number of subjects offered: 28
- Minimum number of subjects offered: 1

> Some courses are made up of multiple subjects, for example:

Reviewer 3: I've used the correct capitalisation for courses (lower case except languages). In the service many will have an initial capital just because that's how they're displayed in the filter list.

> ## An analysis of the course data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Course data analysis
```

> From the course data for ‘synced’ providers, there are approximately 40 subjects across primary and secondary levels.

Reviewer 2: Instead of quoting synced, can you explain what you mean.

Author: Changed to "the providers using the Manage service"

- biology and physical education
- business studies and economics
- English and drama
- maths and physics

Some courses are made up of multiple subjects and are also labelled differently, for example:

- biology, chemistry and physics together is commonly labelled ‘combined science’
- French, German and Spanish together is commonly labelled ‘modern languages’

> Renaming subjects can be problematic. For example, ‘primary’ (code 00) is often renamed to ‘primary (5-11)’ or ‘primary (7-11)’. There are also instances where ‘primary’ is renamed to a subject that already exists, such as ‘primary with mathematics’ (which is also code 03).

Reviewer 3: A bit more explanation would be useful here. I don't think it's clear how subjects are renamed or why providers do it. Could we link to more information and possibly a list of subjects and codes?

Reviewer 3: Overall this opening section is interesting, but it would be good to understand how it feeds into the design. Are we showing the 'archetypal' subject names, or the ones created by providers? How are we handling the ones made of multiple subjects and the unusual ones like 'modern languages'?

Author: This has now been addressed.

> Providers are able to rename subjects when creating a course, whilst retaining the underlying subject code. For example, ‘Primary’ (code: 00) is often renamed to ‘Primary (5-11)’ or ‘Primary (7-11)’. There are also instances where ‘Primary’ is renamed to a subject that already exists, such as ‘Primary with mathematics’ (code: 03).

Reviewer 2: Again, ‘users’

Author: Updated as requested

> Some courses are compound subjects—they are made up of several subjects. For example, Biology, Chemistry and Physics together form a course often labelled ‘Combined science’. French, German and Spanish together may form a course labelled ‘Modern languages’.

Reviewer 2: How about:

```
Some courses are made up of multiple subjects. For example blah, blah and blah.
```

Kill everything else.

Author: I've reorganised this section.

- Business Studies and Economics
- English and Drama
- Maths and Physics

> ## What we changed and why

Reviewer 2: Check and use tense from previous design post on automatically declining offers.

This change included:

- introducing a new filter pattern to display a long list of subjects. There may be as many as 40 subjects displayed in the list, so showing them as standard list of checkboxes, similar to other filters, would have extended the filter panel to an unmanageable length.
- providing a means to search through the list of subjects so that a user does not need to scroll through the list of items. For example, they can type ‘primary’ and will be presented with all the primary subjects.
- repeating the selected subject tags in the context of the filter, providing an immediate and obvious confirmation of the subjects that have been applied and an additional way to remove the filters.

## How it works

The subject filter only shows subjects for the courses offered by the provider.

> If there are more than 15 subjects offered by the provider, the subject filter is enhanced with JavaScript. In this situation, the filter includes a search box and the list of subject checkboxes is contained in a scrollable region. Typing in the search box will reduce the number of subjects shown, if the search term is found. If the term is not found, the subject list will be empty.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there are more than 15 subjects, JavaScript is used to add a search box. Typing in the search box will update the subject list below with subjects that match the search term. If there are no matches, the list will be empty.
```

> If JavaScript is disabled, the subjects are still contained within the scrollable region, but the search box is no longer shown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If JavaScript is unavailable, the subjects are still contained within the scrollable region, but the search box is no longer shown.
```

If there are 15 subjects or fewer offered by a provider, the subject filter will be displayed as a list of checkboxes.

> Once one or more subjects are chosen and the filter has been applied, the subject tags will be displayed in the main tag list at the top of the filter panel as well as in context of the subject filter itself. Repeating the filters in context helps to remind users what subjects have been chosen as they may be hidden in the scrollable region.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a subject has been selected and the filters have been applied, the remove filter ‘tags’ are displayed under ‘selected filters’ at the top of the filter panel. They’re also displayed at the top of the subject filter to tell users what subjects have been selected as they may be hidden in the scrollable region.
```

{% from "screenshots/macro.njk" import appScreenshots with context %}
{{ appScreenshots({
  items: [{
    text: "No search or filters",
    caption: "The default applications list with no search or filters.",
    img: {
      src: "applications-list-no-search-or-filters.png"
    }
  }, {
    text: "Filtered by subject",
    caption: "The applications list showing the list filtered by subject.",
    img: {
      src: "applications-list-filter-by-subject.png"
    }
  }, {
    text: "Filter by subject inline filter",
    caption: "The applications list showing the subject filter's inline filter being used to find a subject from the list of subjects.",
    img: {
      src: "applications-list-filter-by-subject-filter.png"
    }
  }, {
    text: "Filter by subject with JavaScript disabled",
    caption: "The applications list showing the subject filter with JavaScript disabled. The inline search is not present as this relies on JavaScript.",
    img: {
      src: "applications-list-filter-by-subject-no-javascript.png"
    }
  }]
}) }}

> ## Other considerations

Reviewer 2: Move above screenshots.

Author: Updated as requested
